In the previous lesson,
we drilled down into performance statistics like specificity and sensitivity.
Here's where they become super important for translation into the real world.
The way our algorithm performs directly ties to its intended use.
Imagine I had this clinical dataset with five positive cases for cancer,
and 95 negative cases for cancer.
Our researcher comes along and tells me that he has an algorithm that looks like this,
that can distinguish between cancer and no cancer with 95 percent accuracy.
Sounds pretty good, right?
Well, not really.
Because cancer is so rare in my clinical data,
because my classes are imbalanced.
In fact, this algorithm is predicting that all 100 cases are negative,
to achieve that 95 percent accuracy number.
Because in truth, it correctly predicted 95 percent of the image labels.
But to be honest,
this algorithm is useless.
We touched on this idea of assessing negative cases separately in Lesson 1.
Recall then that we learned about specificity.
This measure looks at the number of
negative cases accurately identified by the algorithm,
and divides it by all of the negative cases in the dataset,
giving us the proportion of accurately identified negative cases in the dataset.
This holds value, but it's not the measure that we most commonly use in clinical tests.
Because normal cases, in other words,
negative cases, take the majority of all of the cases we see in the real world.
So we always have an imbalanced dataset with more negative cases than positive,
just like in the example we just saw.
Just like accuracy, specificity would be really high,
even if the algorithm labels all cases as negative,
since it measures the proportion of accurately identified negative cases.
It's not that helpful.
Another issue with specificity is that it does
not take true positives into account at all,
which is what we care about when we are trying to identify the disease.
We also learned a lot about a measure called sensitivity.
This is more frequently used as a clinical performance metric.
Recall from Lesson 1,
that it is used to calculate the number of positive cases identified by the algorithm,
divided by all of the positive cases in the dataset.
This gives us the proportion of accurately identified positive cases in the dataset,
and as we mentioned in Lesson 1,
this measure has two other names: the true positive rate and recall.
Recall is really important, clinically.
Because in medicine, usually,
we care much more about finding disease cases,
in other words, positive cases,
than we care about finding normal cases,
in other words, negative cases.
This metric tells us how often we correctly find a positive case.
Notice that this metric takes nothing into account about false positives.
So if the algorithm says the case is positive,
but it's actually negative, we wouldn't know.
If our algorithm predicted positive for every image in the dataset,
we'd find all the disease cases,
but that would still wouldn't be very useful, would it?
So specificity ignored true positives,
and sensitivity, or recall,
didn't take into account false positives.
We stated why we would care about both of those metrics,
which brings us to a third metric, precision.
Precision looks at the number of positive cases accurately identified by the algorithm,
divided by all of the cases identified as positive by the algorithm,
no matter whether they were identified right or wrong.
You're probably noticing a pattern with all of these statistics having multiple names,
and it holds true for precision too.
This metric is commonly referred to as the positive predictive value.
We're going to focus on precision and recall for assessing performance clinically.
So let's talk about what these two things are measuring,
and when and why they're useful.
As translational scientists, it's our job to think
outside of the box about just classifying images as yes or no,
and to truly understand the pain points of radiologists and patients,
who will be impacted by our tool.
AI isn't just used for diagnosing diseases,
sometimes it's best used for clinical workflow prioritization.
So precision is a great metric to optimize
for when we care most about confidence in positive results.
A high precision test gives you more confidence that
a positive test result is actually positive.
This metric, however, does not take false negatives into account.
So a high precision test could still miss a lot of positive cases.
Because of this, high precision tests don't
necessarily make for great standalone diagnostics,
but they're beneficial when you want to confirm a suspected diagnosis.
Recall, on the other hand,
allows us to confidently rule out disease.
When a test with high recall returns a negative result,
you can be pretty confident that the result is truly negative.
Recall does not take false positives into account though,
so you may have a really high recall,
but you're still labeling a lot of negative cases as positive.
Because of this, clinical applications for
high recall tests are good for things like screening studies,
where you really want to make sure if someone doesn't have a disease,
or worklist prioritization where you want to make sure that
people without the disease are being deprioritized.
Optimizing one of these metrics usually comes at the expense of sacrificing the other.
So let's learn more about that now,
and what it looks like in a real-world setting.